.. _cdpsm_rc1:

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2

This section summarizes the use of a reduced-order CIM [1]_ to support
feeder modeling for the volt-var application in Release Cycle 1 (RC1).
The full CIM includes over 1100 tables in SQL, each one corresponding to
a UML class, enumeration or datatype. In RC1, we’re using approximately
100 such entities, mapped onto 100+ tables in SQL. Later versions of
GridAPPS-D will use a triple-store or graph database, both of which
appear to be better suited for CIM.

The CIM subset described here is based on the profile adopted for the
most recent distribution CIM interoperability test, which was held in
2011 at EDF. For GridAPPS-D, we have updated that profile for
compatibility with the most recent CIM base standard.

Class Diagrams for the Profile
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Figure 1 through Figure 11 present the UML class diagrams generated from
Enterprise Architect [2]_. These diagrams provide an essential roadmap
for understanding:

1. How to ingest CIM XML from various sources into the database

2. How to generate native GridLAB-D input files from the database

For those unfamiliar with UML class diagrams:

1. Lines with an arrowhead indicate class inheritance. For example, in
   Figure 1, ACLineSegment inherits from Conductor, ConductingEquipment,
   Equipment and then PowerSystemResource. ACLineSegment inherits all
   attributes and associations from its ancestors (e.g. length), in
   addition to its own attributes and ancestors.

2. Lines with a diamond indicate composition. For example, in Figure 1,
   ConnectivityNodes make up a TopologicalNode, and then
   TopologicalNodes make up a TopologicalIsland.

3. Lines without a terminating symbol are associations. For example, in
   Figure 1, ACLineSegment has (through inheritance) a BaseVoltage,
   Location and EquipmentContainer.

4. Italicized names at the top of each class indicate the ancestor (aka
   superclass), in cases where the ancestor does not appear on the
   diagram. For example, in Figure 1, PowerSystemResource inherits from
   IdentifiedObject.

Please see *OSPRREYS\_RC1.eap*\  [3]_ in the repository [4]_ on GitHub
for the latest updates. The EnterpriseArchitect file includes a
description of each class, attribute and association. It can also
generate HTML documentation of the CIM, with more detail than provided
here.

The diagrammed UML associations have a role and cardinality at each end,
source and target. In practice, *only one end of each association* is
profiled and implemented in SQL. In some cases, the figure captions
indicate which end, but see the CIM profile for specific definitions, as
described in the object diagram section.

Nearly every CIM class inherits from IdentifiedObject, from which we use
two attributes:

1. mRID is the “master identifier” that must be unique and persistent
   among all instances. It’s often used as the RDF resource identifier,
   and is often a GUID.

2. Name is a human-readable identifier that need not be unique.

|image0|

Figure 1: Placement of ACLineSegment into a Line (aka Feeder). In
GridAPPS-D, the Line is the EquipmentContainer for all power system
components and the ConnectivityNodeContainer for all nodes. It also
corresponds to one TopologicalIsland. It’s part of a
SubGeographicalRegion and GeographicalRegion for proper context with
other CIM models. For visualization, ACLineSegment can be drawn from a
sequence of PositionPoints associated via Location. The Terminals are
free-standing; two of them will “reverse-associate” to the ACLineSegment
as ConductingEquipment, and each terminal also has one ConnectivityNode.
In RC1, we have a one-to-one association between ConnectityNode and
TopologicalNode. The AngleRefTopologicalNode association can be used to
identify the swing bus for GridLAB-D. Otherwise, we’re only using the
topology classes to facilitate state variables, as described in Figure
11. The Terminal:phases attribute is not used; instead, phases will be
defined in the ConductingEquipment instances. The associated
BaseVoltage:nominalVoltage attribute is important for many of the
classes that don’t have their own rated voltage attributes, for example,
EnergyConsumer.

|image1|

Figure 2: There are four different ways to specify ACLineSegment
impedances. In all cases, Conductor:length is required. The first way is
to specify the individual ACLineSegment attributes, which are sequence
impedances and admittances, leaving PerLengthImpedance null. The second
way is to specify the same attributes on an associated
PerLengthSequenceImpedance, in which case the ACLineSegment attributes
should be null. The third way is to associate a PerLengthPhaseImpedance,
leaving the ACLineSegment attributes null. Only conductorCount from 1 to
3 is supported, and there will be 1, 3 or 6 reverse-associated
PhaseImpedanceData instances that define the lower triangle of the Z and
Y matrices per unit length. The sequenceNumber goes from 1 to
N+N\*(N-1)/2 in column order. The fourth way to specify impedance is by
wire/cable and spacing data, as described with Figure 10. If there are
ACLineSegmentPhase instances reverse-associated to the ACLineSegment,
then per-phase modeling applies. There are several use cases for
ACLineSegmentPhase: 1) single-phase or two-phase primary, 2) low-voltage
secondary using phases s1 and s2, 3) associated wire data where the
neutral exists, 4) associated wire data where the phase wires are
different. It is the application’s responsibility to propagate phasing
through terminals to other components, and to identify any miswiring.

|image2|

Figure 3: The EnergySource is balanced three-phase, representing a
transmission system source (this is probably not the way we’ll model
distributed generation in future versions). The EnergyConsumer is a ZIP
load, possibly unbalanced, with an associated LoadResponse instance
defining the ZIP coefficients. For three-phase delta loads, the
phaseConnection is D and the three reverse-associated
EnergyConsumerPhase instances will have phase=A for the AB load, phase=B
for the BC load and phase=C for the AC load. A three-phase wye load may
have either Y or Yn for the phaseConnection. Single-phase and two-phase
loads, including secondary loads, should have phaseConnection=I (for
individual).

|image3|

Figure 4: There are seven different kinds of Switch supported in the
CIM, and all of them have zero impedance. They would all behave the same
in power flow analysis, and all would require many more attributes than
are defined in CIM to support protection analysis. The use cases for
SwitchPhase include 1) single-phase, two-phase and secondary switches,
2) one or two conductors open in a three-phase switch or 3)
transpositions, in which case phaseSide1 and phaseSide2 would be
different.

|image4|

Figure 5: On the left, LinearShuntCompensator and
LinearShuntCompensatorPhase define capacitor banks, in a way very
similar to EnergyConsumer in Figure 3. The kVAR ratings must be
converted to susceptance based on the nominal voltage, nomU. Note that
aVRDelay is really a capacitor control parameter, to be used in
conjunction with RegulatingControl on the right-hand side. The
RegulatingControl associates to the controlled capacitor bank via
RegulatingCondEq, and to the monitored location via Terminal. There is
no support for a PT or CT ratio, so targetDeadband and targetValue have
to be in primary volts, amps, vars, etc.

|image5|

Figure 6: PowerTransformers may be modeled with or without tanks, and in
both cases vectorGroup should be specified according to IEC transformer
standards (e.g. Dy1 for many substation transformers). The case without
tanks is most suitable for balanced three-phase transformers that won’t
reference catalog data; any other case should use tank-level modeling.
In the tankless case, each winding will have a PowerTransformerEnd that
associates to both a Terminal and a BaseVoltage, and the parent
PowerTransformer. The impedance and admittance parameters are defined by
reverse-associated TransformerMeshImpedance between each pair of
windings, and a reverse-associated TransformerCoreAdmittance for one
winding. The units for these are ohms and siemens based on the winding
voltage, rather than per-unit. WindingConnection is similar to
PhaseShuntConnectionKind, adding Z and Zn for zig-zag connections and A
for autotranformers. If the transformer is unbalanced in any way, then
TransformerTankEnd is used instead of PowerTransformerEnd, and then one
or more TransformerTanks may be used in the parent PowerTransformer.
Some of the use cases are 1) center-tapped secondary, 2) open-delta and
3) EHV transformer banks. Tank-level modeling is also required is using
catalog data, as described with Figure 9.

|image6|

Figure 7: A RatioTapChanger can represent a transformer tap changer on
the associated TransformerEnd. The RatioTapChanger has some parameters
defined in a direct-associated TapChangerControl, which inherits from
RegulatingControl some of the same attributes used in capacitor controls
(Figure 5). Therefore, a line voltage regulator in CIM includes a
PowerTransformer, a RatioTapChanger, and a TapChangerControl. The CT and
PT parameters of a voltage regulator can only be described via the
AssetInfo mechanism, described with Figure 8.

|image7|

Figure 8: Many distribution software packages use the concept of catalog
data, aka library data, especially for lines and transformers. We use
the Asset and AssetInfo packages to implement this in CIM. Here, the
TapChangerInfo class includes the CT rating, CT ratio and PT ratio
parameters needed for line drop compensator settings in voltage
regulators. Catalog data is a one-to-many, and sometimes a many-to-many,
relationship. For these lookups, we create an Asset instance that has
one association to AssetInfo, and one-to-many associations to
PowerSystemResources. In this case, many TapChangers can share the same
TapChangerInfo data, which saves space and provides consistency.

|image8|

Figure 9: The catalog mechanism for transformers will associate a
TransformerTank (Figure 6) with TransformerTankInfo (here), via the
one-to-many mechanism described in Figure 8. The PowerTransformerInfo
collects TransformerTankInfo by reverse association, but it does not
link with PowerTransformer. In other words, the physical tanks are
cataloged because transformer testing is done on tanks. One possible use
for PowerTransformerInfo is to help organize the catalog. It’s important
that TransformerEndInfo:endNumber (here) properly match the
TransformerEnd:endNumber (Figure 6). The shunt admittances are defined
by NoLoadTest on a winding / end, usually just one such test. The
impedances are defined by a set of ShortCircuitTests; one winding / end
will be energized, and one or more of the others will be grounded in
these tests.

|image9|

Figure 10: The catalog / library mechanism for ACLineSegment will have a
WireSpacingInfo associated as in Figure 9. This will indicate whether
the line is overhead or underground. phaseWireCount and phaseWireSpacing
define optional bundling, so these will be 1 and 0 for distribution. The
number of phase and neutral conductors is actually defined by the number
of reverse-associated WirePosition instances. For example, a three-phase
line with neutral would have four of them, with phase = A, B, C and N.
On the right-hand side, concrete classes OverheadWireInfo,
TapeShieldCableInfo and ConcentricNeutralCableInfo may be associated (as
in Figure 9) to either ACLineSegment or ACLineSegmentPhase. The
association to ACLineSegment only applies for three-conductor,
three-phase lines all using the same wire data, or to supply just the
ratedCurrent attribute. All other use cases would associate to
ACLineSegmentPhase. It’s the application’s responsibility to calculate
impedances from this data. In particular, soil resistivity and
dielectric constants are not included in the CIM. Typical dielectric
constant values might be defined for each WireInsulationKind.

|image10|

Figure 11: The CIM state variables package might be used to mimic sensor
locations and values on the distribution system. Voltages are measured
on TopologicalNodes, power flows are measured at Terminals, step
positions are measured on TapChangers, status is measured on
ConductingEquipment, and on/off state is measured on ShuntCompensators.
The “injections” have been included here, but there may not be a use
case for them in distribution. On the other hand, we would need an
SvCurrent, which was probably not included in the CIM because of its
transmission system heritage. Attributes for sensor characteristics
would also have to be added in future versions of GridAPPS-D.

Typical Queries
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

These queries focus on requirements of the first volt-var application.

1. Capacitors (Figure 5, Figure 12, Figure 13, Figure 14)

   a. Create a list of capacitors with bus name (Connectivity Node in
      Figure 1), kVAR per phase, control mode, target value and target
      deadband

   b. For a selected capacitor, update the control mode, target value,
      and target deadband

2. Regulators (Figure 7, Figure 8, Figure 12, Figure 29)

   a. List all transformers that have a tap changer attached, along with
      their bus names and kVA sizes

   b. Given a transformer that has a tap changer attached, list or
      update initialDelay, step, subsequentDelay, mode, targetDeadband,
      targetValue, limitVoltage, lineDropCompensation, lineDropR,
      lineDropX, reverseLineDropR and reverseLineDropX

3. Transformers (Figure 6, Figure 9)

   a. Given a bus name or load (Figure 3), find the transformer serving
      it (Figure 16, Figure 19)

   b. Find the substation transformer, defined as the largest
      transformer (by kVA size and or highest voltage rating)

   c. List the transformer catalog (Figure 9, Figure 20) with name,
      highest ratedS, list of winding ratedU in descending order, vector
      group (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vector\_group used with
      connectionKind and phaseAngleClock), and percent impedance

   d. List the same information as in item c, but for transformers
      (Figure 6) and also retrieving their bus names. Note that a
      transformer can be defined in three ways

      i.   Without tanks, for three-phase, multi-winding, balanced
           transformers (Figure 16 and Figure 17).

      ii.  With tanks along with TransformerTankInfo (Figure 9) from a
           catalog of “transformer codes”, which may describe balanced
           or unbalanced transformers. See Figure 19 and Figure 20.

      iii. With tanks for unbalanced transformers, and
           TransformerTankInfo created on-the-fly. See Figure 19 and
           Figure 20.

   e. Given a transformer (Figure 6), update it to use a different
      catalog entry (TransformerTankInfo in Figure 9)

4. Lines (Figure 2, Figure 10, Figure 12)

   a. List the line and cable catalog entries that meet a minimum
      ratedCurrent and specific WireUsageKind. For cables, be able to
      specify tape shield vs. concentric neutral, the
      WireInsulationKind, and a minimum insulationThickness. (Figure 27)

   b. Given a line segment (Figure 2) update to use a different linecode
      (Figure 10, Figure 26)

   c. Given a bus name, list the ACLineSegments connected to the bus,
      along with the length, total r, total x, and phases used. There
      are four cases as noted in the caption of Figure 2, and see Figure
      23 through Figure 26.

   d. Given a bus name, list the set of ACLineSegments (or
      PowerTransformers and Switches) completing a path from it back to
      the EnergySource (Figure 3). Normally, the applications have to
      build a graph structure in memory to do this, so it would be very
      helpful if a graph/semantic database can do this.

5. Voltage and other measurements (Figure 1, Figure 11)

   a. Given a bus, attach a voltage measurement point (SvVoltage, Figure
      30)

   b. List all voltage measurement points and their buses, and for each
      bus, list the phases actually present

   c. For tap changer position (SvTapStep, Figure 31), attach and list
      measurements as in items a and b

   d. For capacitor switch status (SvShuntCompensatorSections, Figure
      32), attach and list measurements as in items a and b

6. Loads (Figure 3, Figure 28)

   a. Given a bus name, list and total all of the loads connected by
      phase, showing the total p and q, and the composite ZIP
      coefficients

7. Switching (Figure 4, Figure 22)

   a. Given a bus name, trace back to the EnergySource and list the
      switches encountered, grouped by type (i.e. the leaf class in
      Figure 4). Also include the ratedCurrent, breakingCapacity if
      applicable, and open/close status. If SwitchPhase is used, show
      the phasing on each side and the open/close status of each phase.

   b. Given switch, toggle its open/close status.

Object Diagrams for Queries
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This section contains UML object diagrams for the purpose of
illustrating how to perform typical queries and updates. For those
unfamiliar with UML object diagrams:

1. Each object will be an instance of a class, and more than one
   instance of a class can appear on the diagram. For example, Figure 12
   shows two ConnectivityNode instances, one for each end of a
   ConductingEquipment.

2. The object name (if specified and important) appears before the colon
   (:) above the line, while the UML class appears after the colon.
   Every object in CIM will have a unique ID, and a name (not
   necessarily unique), even if not shown here.

3. Some objects may be shown with run-time state below the line. These
   are attribute value assignments, drawn from those available in the
   UML class or one of the class ancestors. The object may have more
   attribute assignments, but only those directly relevant to the figure
   captions are shown in the diagrams of this section.

4. Object associations are shown with solid lines, role names, and
   multiplicities similar to the UML class diagrams. One important
   difference is that only one way of navigating a particular
   association will be defined in the profile. For example, the lower
   left corner of Figure 1 shows a two-way link between TopologicalNode
   and ConnectivityNode in the UML class diagram. However, Figure 12
   shows that only one direction has been defined in the profile. Each
   ConnectivityNode has a direct reference to its corresponding
   TopologicalNode. In order to navigate the reverse direction from
   TopologicalNode to ConnectivityNode, some type of conditional query
   would be required. In other words, the object diagrams in this
   section indicate which associations can actually be used in
   GridAPPS-D.

5. In some cases, the multiplicities on the object diagrams are more
   restrictive than on the class diagrams, due to profiling. For
   example, Figure 12 reflects a one-to-one correspondence between
   ConnectivityNode and TopologicalNode in this profile.

The object diagrams are intended to help you break down the CIM queries
into common sub-tasks. For example, query #1 works with capacitors. It’s
always possible to select a capacitor (aka LinearShuntCompensator) by
name. In order to find the capacitor at a bus, say “bus1” in Figure 12,
one would retrieve all Terminals having a ConnectivityNode reference to
“bus1”. Each of those Terminals will have a ConductingEquipment
reference, and you want the Terminal(s) for which that reference is
actually a LinearShuntCompensator. In this CIM profile, only leaf
classes (e.g. LinearShuntCompensator) will be instantiated, never base
classes like ConductingEquipment. There can be more than one capacitor
at a bus, more than one load, more than one line, etc.

|image11|

Figure 12: In order to traverse buses and components, begin with a
ConnectivityNode (left). Collect all terminals referencing that
ConnectivityNode; each Terminal will have one-to-one association with
ConductingEquipment, of which there are many subclasses. In this
example, the ConductingEquipment has a second terminal referencing the
ConnectivityNode called bus2. There are applications for both
Depth-First Search (DFS) and Bread-First Search (BFS) traversals. Note
1: the Terminals have names, but these are not useful. Some Terminal
names have been shown above, just to illustrate there is no useful
implication of sequencing or ordering. Note 2: in this version of
GridAPPS-D, we have one-to-one association of TopologicalNode and
ConnectivityNode, but all searches should visit ConnectivityNodes. Note
3: transformers are subclasses of ConductingEquipment, but we traverse
connectivity via transformer ends (aka windings). This is illustrated
later.

In order to find capacitors (or anything else) associated with a
particular “feeder”, Figure 13 shows that you would query for objects
having EquipmentContainer reference to the feeder’s Line object. In
GridAPPS-D RC1, we only use Line for equipment container in CIM, and
this would correspond to one entire GridLAB-D model. There is also a
BaseVoltage reference that will have the system nominal voltage for the
capacitor’s location. However, in order to work with equipment ratings
you should use ratedS and ratedU attributes where they exist,
particularly for capacitors and transformers. These attributes are often
slightly different than the “system voltage”. Most of the attribute
units in CIM are SI, with a few exceptions like percent and kW values on
transformer test sheets (i.e. CIM represents the test sheet, not the
equipment).

|image12|

Figure 13: All conducting equipment lies within an EquipmentContainer,
which in GridAPPS-D, will be a Line object named after the feeder. It
also has reference to a BaseVoltage, which is typically one of the ANSI
preferred system voltages. Power transformers are a little different, in
that each winding (called “end” in CIM) has reference to a BaseVoltage.
Note that equipment ratings come from the vendor, and in this case
ratedU is slightly different from nominalVoltage. All conducting
equipment has a Location, which contains XY coordinates (see Figure 1).
The Location is useful for visualization, but is not essential for a
power flow model.

Completing the discussion of capacitors, Figure 14 provides two examples
for single-phase, and three-phase with local voltage control. As shunt
elements, capacitors have only one Terminal instance. Loads and sources
have one terminal, lines and switches have two terminals, and
transformers have two or more terminals. Examples of all those are shown
later. In Figure 14, the capacitor’s kVAR rating will be based on its
nameplate ratedU, not the system’s nominalVoltage.

Often, the question will arise “what phases exist at this bus?”. There
is no phasing explicitly associated with a ConnectivityNode or Terminal
in CIM. To answer this question, we’d have to query for all
ConductingEquipment instances having Terminals connected to that bus, as
in Figure 12. The types of ConductingEquipment that may have individual
phases include LinearShuntCompensators (Figure 14), ACLineSegments,
PowerTransformers (via TransformerEnds), EnergyConsumers, and
descendants of Switch. If the ConductingEquipment has such individual
phases, then add those phases to list of phases existing at the bus. If
there are no individual phases, then ABC all exist at the bus. Note this
doesn’t guarantee that all wiring to the bus is correct; for example,
you could still have a three-phase load served by only a two-phase line,
which would be a modeling error. In Figure 14, we’d find phase C at
Bus611 and phases ABC at Bus675. Elsewhere in the model, there should be
ACLineSegments, PowerTransformers or Switch descendants delivering phase
C to Bus611, all three phases ABC to Bus675.

|image13|

Figure 14: Capacitors are called LinearShuntCompensator in CIM. On the
left, a 100 kVAR, 2400 V single-phase bank is shown on phase C at bus
611. bPerSection = 100e3 / 2400^2 [S], and the bPerSection on
LinearShuntCompensatorPhase predominates; these values can differ among
phases if there is more than one phase present. On the right, a balanced
three-phase capacitor is shown at bus 675, rated 300 kVAR and 4160 V
line-to-line. We know it’s balanced three phase from the absence of
associated LinearShuntCompensatorPhase objects. bPerSection = 300e4 /
4160^2 [S]. This three-phase bank has a voltage controller attached with
2400 V setpoint and 240 V deadband, meaning the capacitor switches ON if
the voltage drops below 2280 V and OFF if the voltage rises above 2520
V. These voltages have to be monitored line-to-neutral in CIM, with no
VT ratio. In this case, the control monitors the same Terminal that the
capacitor is connected to, but a different conducting equipment’s
Terminal could be used. The control delay is called aVRDelay in CIM, and
it’s an attribute of the LinearShuntCompensator instead of the
RegulatingControl. It corresponds to “dwell time” in GridLAB-D.

Figure 15 through Figure 20 illustrate the transformer query tasks, plus
Figure 29 for attached voltage regulators. The autotransformer example
is rated 500/345/13.8 kV and 500/500/50 MVA, for a transmission system.
The short circuit test values are Z\ :sub:`HL`\ =10%, Z\ :sub:`HT`\ =25%
and Z\ :sub:`LT`\ =30%. The no-load test values are 0.05% exciting
current and 0.025% no-load losses. These convert to r, x, g and b in SI
units, from and , where S\ :sub:`rated` and U\ :sub:`rated` are based on
the “from” winding (aka end). The same base quantities would be used to
convert r, x, g and b back to per-unit or percent. The open wye – open
delta impedances are already represented in percent or kW, from the test
reports.

|image14|

Figure 15: Autotransformer with delta tertiary winding acts like a
wye-wye transformer with smaller delta tertiary. The vector group would
be Yynd1 or Yyd1. For analyses other than power flow, it can be
represented more accurately as the physical series (n1) – common (n2)
connection, with a vector group Yand1. In either case, it’s a
three-winding transformer.

|image15|

Figure 16: A three-winding autotransformer is represented in CIM as a
PowerTransformer with three PowerTransformerEnds, because it’s balanced
and three-phase. The three Terminals have direct ConductingEquipment
references to the PowerTransformer, so you can find it from bus1, busX
or busY. However, each PowerTransformerEnd has a back-reference to the
same Terminal, and it’s own reference to BaseVoltage (Figure 13); that’s
how you link the matching buses and windings, which must have compatible
voltages. Terminals have no sequence number, so the endNumber is
important for correct linkage to catalog data as discussed later. By
convention, ends with highest ratedU have the lowest endNumber, and
endNumber establishes that end’s place in the vectorGroup.

|image16|

Figure 17: Power transformer impedances correspond to the three-winding
autotransformer example of Figure 15 and Figure 16. There are three
instances of TransformerMeshImpedance connected pair-wise between the
three windings / ends. The x and r values are in Ohms referred to the
end with highest ratedU in that pair. There is just one
TransformerCoreAdmittance, usually attached to the end with lowest
ratedU, and the attribute values are Siemens referred to that end’s
ratedU.

|image17|

Figure 18: Open wye - open delta transformer banks are used to provide
inexpensive three-phase service to loads, by using only two single-phase
transformers. This is an unbalanced transformer, and as such it requires
tank modeling in CIM. Physically, the two transformers would be in
separate tanks. Note that Tank A is similar to the residential
center-tapped secondary transformer, except the CIM phases would include
s1 and s2 instead of A and B.

|image18|

Figure 19: Unbalanced PowerTransformer instances comprise one or more
TransformerTanks, which own the TransformerTankEnds. Through the ends,
busHi collects phases ABN and busLo collects phases ABCN. Typically,
phase C will also exist at busHi, but this transformer doesn’t require
it. We still assign vectorGroup Yd1 to the supervising PowerTransformer,
as this is the typical case. The modeler should determine that. By
comparison to Figure 19, there is a possible ambiguity in how endA3
represents the polarity dot at the neutral end of Wdg A3. An earlier CIM
proposal would have assigned phaseAngleClock = 6 on endA3, but the
attribute was removed from TransformerTankEnd. It may not be possible to
infer the correct winding polarities from the vectorGroup in all cases.
There is a phaseAngleClock attribute on TransformerTankEndInfo, but that
represents a shelf state of the tank, not necessarily connections in the
field. Therefore, it may be necessary to propose the phaseAngleClock
attribute for TransformerTankEnd.

|image19|

Figure 20: This Asset catalog example defines the impedances for Tank B
of the open wye – open delta bank. This is a 50 kVA, 7200 / 240 V
single-phase transformer. It has 1% exciting current and 0.4 kW loss in
the no-load test, plus 2.1% reactance and 0.5 kW loss in the
short-circuit test. A multi-winding transformer could have more than one
grounded end in a short-circuit test, but this is not common. The
catalog data is linked with one or more TransformerTanks via the Asset
instance, shown to the left. This Asset instance won’t exist without
such links (i.e. the catalog data is actually used), so cardinalities
are 1 for AssetInfo and 1..\* for PowerSystemResources. Furthermore,
endNumber on the TransformerEndInfo has to match endNumber on the
TransformerTankEnd instances associated to Tank B. Instead of catalog
information, we could have used mesh impedance and core admittance as in
Figure 17, but we’d have to convert the test sheets to SI units and we
could not share data with other TransformerTank instances, both of which
are inconvenient.

Figure 21 through Figure 27 illustrate the query tasks for
ACLineSegments and Switches, which will define most of the circuit’s
connectivity. The example sequence impedances were based on Z\ :sub:`1`
= 0.1 + j0.8 Ω/mile and Z\ :sub:`0` = 0.5 + j2.0 Ω /mile. For
distribution systems, use of the shared catalog data is more common,
either pre-calculated matrix (Figure 25) or spacing and conductor
(Figure 26 and Figure 27). In both cases, impedance calculation is
outside the scope of CIM (e.g. GridLAB-D internally calculates line
impedance from spacing and conductor data).

|image20|

Figure 21: An ACLineSegment with two phases, A and C. If there are no
ACLineSegmentPhase instances that associate to it, assume it’s a
three-phase ACLineSegment. This adds phases AC to bus671 and bus684.

|image21|

Figure 22: This 50-Amp load break switch connects phases AC between
busLeft and busRight. Without associated SwitchPhase instances, it would
be a three-phase switch. This switch also transposes the phases; A on
side 1 connects with C on side 2, while C on side 1 connects with A on
side 2. This is the only way of transposing phases in CIM. Note the
ambiguity in side 1 and side 2, because Terminal.sequenceNumber was
subsequently removed from the CIM. This needs to be addressed in a
future version of the CIM. Also note that LoadBreakSwitch has the open
attribute inherited from Switch, while SwitchPhase has the converse
closed attribute. In order to open and close the switch, these
attributes would be toggled appropriately. See Figure 4 for other types
of switch.

|image22|

Figure 23: This is a balanced three-phase ACLineSegment between bus632
and bus671, 2000 feet or 609.6 m long. Sequence impedances are specified
in ohms, as attributes on the ACLineSegment. This is a typical pattern
for transmission lines, but not distribution lines.

|image23|

Figure 24: The impedances from Figure 23 were divided by 609.6 m, to
obtain ohms per meter for seqCat1. Utilities often call this a “line
code”, and other ACLineSegment instances can share the same
PerLengthImpedance. A model imported into the CIM could have many line
codes, not all of them used in that particular model. However, those
line codes should be available for updates by reassigning
PerLengthImpedance.

|image24|

Figure 25: This is a two-phase line segment from bus671 to bus684 using
a line code, which has been specified using a 2x2 symmetric matrix of
phase impedances per meter, instead of sequence impedances per meter.
This is more common for distribution than either Figure 23 or Figure 24.
It’s distinguished from Figure 24 by the fact that PerLengthImpedance
references an instance of PerLengthPhaseImpedance, not
PerLengthSequenceImpedance. The conductorCount attribute tells us it’s a
2x2 matrix, which will have two unique diagonal elements and one
distinct off-diagonal element. The elements are provided in three
PhaseImpedanceData instances, which are named here for clarity as Z11,
Z12 and Z22. However, the sequenceNumber is most significant, as the
elements must be numbered in lower triangular form. Finally, note that
Z11 and Z22 are slightly different. The matrix row numbers must
correspond to the phases present in ABC order. CIM doesn’t provide a way
of transposing matrix row assignments, so in order to swap phases A and
C, we’d have to create a second instance of PerLengthPhaseImpedance,
with Z11 and Z22 swapped. The GridAPPS-D CIM importer will create these
automatically, which expands the set of line codes. As presented here,
mtx604 can apply to phasing AB, BC or AC.

|image25|

Figure 26: The two-phase ACLineSegment impedance defined by sharing wire
and spacing data from a catalog. Each ACLineSegmentPhase links to an
OverheadWireInfo instance via the Asset instance. If the neutral (N) is
present, we have to specify its wire information for a correct impedance
calculation. In this case, ACN all use the same wire type, but they can
be different, especially for the neutral. Similarly, the WireSpacingInfo
associates to the ACLineSegment itself via a separate Asset instance.
These Asset instances only exist when the catalog data is used, so
cardinalities are 1 for AssetInfo and 1..\* for PowerSystemResources.

|image26|

Figure 27: The upper five instances define catalog attributes for Figure
26. The WirePosition xCoord and yCoord units are meters, not feet, and
they include explicit phase assignments to match ACLineSegmentPhase.
This removes any ambiguity, but it’s still necessary to create copies
for phase transposition. The phaseWireSpacing and phaseWireCount
attributes are for sub-conductor bundling on EHV and UHV transmission
lines; bundling is not used on distribution. The number of WirePositions
that reference spc505acn determine how many wires need to be assigned,
and the phase attributes in those WirePosition instances determine how
many phases and neutrals there are. Eliminating the neutral, this would
produce a 2x2 phase impedance matrix. Although the pattern appears
general enough to support multiple neutrals and transmission overbuild,
the CIM doesn’t actually have the required phasing codes. When isCable
is true, the WirePosition yCoord values would be negative for
underground depth. To find overhead wires of a certain size or ampacity,
we can put query conditions on the ratedCurrent attribute. To find
underground conductors, we query the ConcentricNeutralCableInfo or
TapeShieldCableInfo instead of OverheadWireInfo. All three inherit the
ratedCurrent attribute from WireInfo. Cables don’t have a voltage rating
in CIM, but you can use insulationThickness as a proxy for voltage
rating in queries. Here, 5.588 mm corresponds to 220 mils, which is a
common size for distribution.

Figure 28 illustrates the loads, which are called EnergyConsumer in CIM.
The houses and appliances from GridLAB-D are not supported in CIM. Only
ZIP loads can be represented. Further, any load schedules would have to
be defined outside of CIM. Assume that the CIM loads are peak values.

Figure 29 illustrates the voltage regulator function. Note that
GridLAB-D combines the regulator and transformer functions, while CIM
separates them. Also, the CIM provides voltage and current transducer
ratios for tap changer controls, but not for capacitor controls.

Figure 30 through Figure 32 illustrate how measurements required for RC1
can be attached to buses or other components. Individual phase
measurements for voltage and capacitor status have to be added.

|image27|

Figure 28: The three-phase load (aka EnergyConsumer) on bus671 is
balanced and connected in delta. It has no ratedU attribute, so use the
referenced BaseVoltage (Figure 13) if a voltage level is required. On
the right, a three-phase wye-connected unbalanced load on bus675 is
indicated by the presence of three EnergyConsumerPhase instances
referencing UnbalancedLoad. For consistency in searches and
visualization, UnbalancedLoad.pfixed should be the sum of the three
phase values, and likewise for UnbalancedLoad.qfixed. In power flow
solutions, the individual phase values would be used. Both loads share
the same LoadResponse instance, which defines a constant power
characteristic for both P and Q, because the percentages for constant
impedance and constant current are all zero. The two other most commonly
used LoadResponseCharacteristics have 100% constant current, and 100%
constant impedance. Any combination can be used, and the units don’t
have to be percent (i.e. use a summation to determine the denominator
for normalization).

|image28|

Figure 29: In CIM, the voltage regulator function is separated from the
tap-changing transformer. The IEEE 13-bus system has a bank of three
independent single-phase regulators at busRG60, and this example shows a
RatioTapChanger attached to the regulator on phase A, represented by the
TransformerTankEnd having phases=A or phases=AN. See Figure 19 for a
more complete picture of TransformerTankEnds, or Figure 16 for a more
complete picture of PowerTransformerEnds. Either one can be the
TransformerEnd in this figure, but with a PowerTransformerEnd, all three
phase taps would change in unison (i.e. they are “ganged”). Most
regulator attributes of interest are found in RatioTapChanger or
TapChangerControl instances. However, we need the Asset mechanism to
specify ctRatio, ptRatio and ctRating values. These are inherent to the
equipment, whereas the attributes of RatioTapChanger and
TapChangerControl are all settings per instance. For the IEEE 13-bus
example, there would be separate RatioTapChanger and TapChangerControl
instances for phases B and C.

|image29|

Figure 30: In CIM, the voltage measurement attaches to TopologicalNode,
which we can find from the ConnectivityNode in GridAPPS-D. Positive
sequence or phase A measurement is implied, so we must add a phase
attribute on SvVoltage for GridAPPS-D. Physically, a voltage sensor is
more closely associated with a Terminal or ConnectivityNode.

|image30|

Figure 31: SvTapStep links to a TransformerEnd indirectly, through the
RatioTapChanger. There is no phasing ambiguity because
TransformerTankEnd has its phases attribute, while PowerTransformerEnd
always includes ABC. Units for SvTapStep.position are per-unit.

|image31|

Figure 32: The on/off measurement for a capacitor bank attaches directly
to LinearShuntCompensator, but there is no phasing support. That needs
to be proposed as a CIM extension.

Metering Relationship to Loads in the CIM
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

These UML class relationships in Figure 33 through Figure 35 have not
been planned for implementation in RC1, but in a future version of
GridAPPS-D, they can be used to link automated meter readings with loads
in the distribution system model.

|image32|

Figure 33: Energy Consumers are associated to Metering Usage Points

|image33|

Figure 34: Metering Usage Points have one or more EndDevices (i.e.
Meters)

|image34|

Figure 35: EndDevices associate to meter readings, functions and
channels.

CIM Enhancements for RC2
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Possible CIM enhancements to support volt-var feeder modeling:

1. Different on and off delay parameters for RegulatingControl (Figure
   5)

2. Phase modeling for EnergySource (Figure 3)

3. Current ratings for PerLengthImpedance (Figure 2). At present, some
   users rely on associated WireInfo, ignoring all attributes except
   currentRating.

4. Transducers for RegulatingControl (Figure 5)

5. Dielectric constant and soil resistivity (Figure 10)

6. Current flow and switch open/closed measurements (Figure 11)

7. Individual phase measurements for voltage and capacitor state (Figure
   11)

8. Clock angles for TransformerTankEnd (i.e. move phaseAngleClock from
   PowerTransformerEnd to TransformerEnd (Figure 6)

9. Clarify side1 and side2 for switch phase modeling (Figure 4)

CIM Profile in CIMTool
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

CIMTool was used to develop and test the profile for RC1, because it:

1. Generates SQL for the MySQL database definition

2. Validates instance files against the profile

The CIMTool developer will not be able to support the tool in future, so
eventually we will use the new Schema Composer feature in Enterprise
Architect.

In order to view the profile, import the archived Eclipse project
*OSPRREYS\_CIMTOOL.zip* into CIMTool. Please see the CIM tutorial slides
provided by Margaret Goodrich for user instructions.

Four instance files were validated against the profile in CIMTool. In
order to generate them, we use a current version of OpenDSS with the
*Export CDPSMcombined* command on four IEEE test feeders that come with
OpenDSS:

1. **~/src/opendss/Test/IEEE13\_CDPSM.dss** is the IEEE 13-bus test
   feeder with per-length phase impedance matrices and a delta tertiary
   added to the substation transformer.

2. **~/src/opendss/Test/IEEE13\_Assets.dss** is the IEEE 13-bus test
   feeder with catalog data for overhead lines, cables and transformers.
   Capacitor controls have also been added.

3. **~/src/opendss/Distrib/IEEETestCases/8500-Node/Master.dss** is the
   IEEE 8500-node test feeder with balanced secondary loads.

4. **~/src/opendss/Distrib/IEEETestCases/8500-Node/Master-unbal.dss** is
   the IEEE 8500-node test feeder with unbalanced secondary loads.

Either the 3\ :sup:`rd` or 4\ :sup:`th` feeder will be used for the
volt-var application. The 1\ :sup:`st` and 2\ :sup:`nd` feeders are used
to validate more parts of the CIM profile used in RC1. In all four
cases, CIMTool reports only two kinds of validation error:

1. **Isolated connectivity node**: CIMTool expects two or more Terminals
   per ConnectivityNode, but dead ended feeder segments will have only
   one on the last node. This is not really an error, at least for
   distribution systems.

2. **Minimum cardinality**: For TapChangerControl instances, the
   inherited RegulatingControl.RegulatingCondEq association is not
   specified. This is not really an error, as the association is only
   needed for shunt capacitor controls. Figure 36 shows that
   RegulatingCondEq was not selected for TapChangerControl in the
   profile, so this may reflect a defect in the validation code. Efforts
   to circumvent it were not successful.

With these caveats, the profile and instances validate against each
other, for feeder models that solve in OpenDSS.

|image35|

Figure 36: Profiling TapChangerControl in CIMTool; the inherited
RegulatingCondEq is not included.

Creating Data Definition Language (DDL) for MySQL
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

As shown at the top of Figure 36, CIMTool builds *RC1.sql* to create
tables in a relational database, but the syntax doesn’t match that
required for MySQL. The following manual edits were made:

1.  Globally change **CHAR VARYING(30)** to **varchar(50)** with a blank
    space pre-pended before the varchar

2.  Globally change **“** to **\`**

3.  In foreign keys to enumerations, change the referenced attribute
    from **mRID** to **name**

4.  In foreign keys to **EquipmentContainer** or
    **ConnectivityNodeContainer**, change the referenced table to
    **Line**

5.  In foreign keys to **ShuntCompensator**, change the referenced table
    to **LinearShuntCompensator**

6.  In foreign keys to **TapChanger**, change the referenced table to
    **RatioTapChanger**.

7.  The CIM UML incorporates several polymorphic associations, which
    can’t be implemented directly in SQL. Base parent class tables were
    added for:

    a. **AssetInfo**, which can be referenced via the Parent attribute
       from ConcentricNeutralCableInfo, TapeShieldCableInfo,
       OverheadWireInfo, WireSpacingInfo, TapChangerInfo and
       TransformerTankInfo

    b. **TransformerEnd**, which can be referenced via the Parent
       attribute from PowerTransformerEnd and TransformerTankEnd

    c. **PerLengthImpedance**, which can be referenced via the Parent
       attribute from PerLengthSequenceImpedance and
       PerLengthPhaseImpedance

    d. **Switch**, which can be referenced via the SwtParent attribute
       from Breaker, Fuse, Sectionaliser, Recloser, Disconnector, Jumper
       and LoadBreakSwitch.

    e. **ConductingEquipment**, which can be referenced via the Parent
       attribute from ACLineSegment, EnergySource, EnergyConsumer,
       LinearShuntCompensator, PowerTransformer, and all of the Switch
       types.

8.  The catalog data mechanism in Figure 8 required two new tables, one
    for polymorphic associations and another for many-to-many joins:

    a. **PowerSystemResource**, which can be referenced via the PSR
       attribute from ACLineSegment, ACLineSegmentPhase, RatioTapChanger
       and TransformerTank.

    b. **AssetInfoJoin**, which references AssetInfo and
       PowerSystemResource. This table actually supplants the Asset
       class in Figure 8.

9.  The ShortCircuitTest in Figure 9 has a one-to-many association to
    TransformerEndEnfo, and we need to implement the many side by
    adding:

    a. **GroundedEndJoin**, which references TransformerEndInfo and
       ShortCircuitTest.

10. The ToTransformerEnd association in Figure 6 is one-to-many, so
    CIMTool did not export it to SQL. Rather than create a join table, a
    ToTransformerEnd attribute was added to TransformerMeshImpedance.
    This supports only one-to-one association, which is justified
    because the one-to-many case is very rare, and GridLAB-D cannot
    model transformers having the one-to-many association. This
    restriction may be removed in future versions having a semantic or
    graph database.

    Except for the first two items, all of these adjustments arose from
    the absence of inheritance or polymorphism in SQL. These adjustments
    will make the updates, queries and views more complicated. However,
    they allow referential integrity to be enforced, which is one of the
    most important reasons to use SQL and relational databases. Other
    types of data store could be a more natural fit to the CIM UML, but
    they may not have the performance of a relational database.

    In GitHub:

1. *RC1.sql* is the manually adjusted SQL export from CIMTool

2. *LoadRC1.sql* will **re-create the GridAPPS-D database in MySQL**,
   incorporate *RC1.sql*, and finally document the foreign keys. It
   should run without error.

.. [1]
   See http://cimug.ucaiug.org/default.aspx and the EPRI CIM Primer at:
   http://www.epri.com/abstracts/Pages/ProductAbstract.aspx?ProductId=000000003002006001

.. [2]
   Suggest “Corporate Edition” from http://www.sparxsystems.com/ for
   working with CIM UML. The free CIMTool is still available at
   http://wiki.cimtool.org/index.h tml, but support is being phased out.

.. [3]
   OSPRREYS is an older name for GridAPPS-D

.. [4]
   https://github.com/GRIDAPPSD/Powergrid-Models/CIM

.. |image0| image:: CDPSM_RC1/media/cim_NamingHierarchyPart1.png
.. |image1| image:: CDPSM_RC1/media/cim_LineModel.png
.. |image2| image:: CDPSM_RC1/media/cim_LoadsAndSources.png
.. |image3| image:: CDPSM_RC1/media/cim_SwitchingEquipment.png
.. |image4| image:: CDPSM_RC1/media/cim_RegulatingEquipment.png
.. |image5| image:: CDPSM_RC1/media/cim_Transformer.png
.. |image6| image:: CDPSM_RC1/media/cim_TapChangerClass.png
.. |image7| image:: CDPSM_RC1/media/cim_AssetsOverview.png
.. |image8| image:: CDPSM_RC1/media/cim_DCIMTransformerInfo.png
.. |image9| image:: CDPSM_RC1/media/cim_DCIMWireInfo.png
.. |image10| image:: CDPSM_RC1/media/cim_StateVariables.png
.. |image11| image:: CDPSM_RC1/media/cim_BusNavigation.png
.. |image12| image:: CDPSM_RC1/media/cim_ConductingEquipmentContexts.png
.. |image13| image:: CDPSM_RC1/media/cim_Capacitors.png
.. |image14| image:: CDPSM_RC1/media/cim_Autotransformer.png
.. |image15| image:: CDPSM_RC1/media/cim_PowerTransformerNavigation.png
.. |image16| image:: CDPSM_RC1/media/cim_PowerTransformerImpedance.png
.. |image17| image:: CDPSM_RC1/media/cim_OpenWyeOpenDelta.png
.. |image18| image:: CDPSM_RC1/media/cim_TankNavigation.png
.. |image19| image:: CDPSM_RC1/media/cim_TankImpedance.png
.. |image20| image:: CDPSM_RC1/media/cim_LinePhaseNavigation.png
.. |image21| image:: CDPSM_RC1/media/cim_SwitchPhaseNavigation.png
.. |image22| image:: CDPSM_RC1/media/cim_LineInstance.png
.. |image23| image:: CDPSM_RC1/media/cim_LineSequence.png
.. |image24| image:: CDPSM_RC1/media/cim_LineMatrix.png
.. |image25| image:: CDPSM_RC1/media/cim_LineAssetInfo.png
.. |image26| image:: CDPSM_RC1/media/cim_LineCatalog.png
.. |image27| image:: CDPSM_RC1/media/cim_Loads.png
.. |image28| image:: CDPSM_RC1/media/cim_TapChanger.png
.. |image29| image:: CDPSM_RC1/media/cim_VoltageMeasurements.png
.. |image30| image:: CDPSM_RC1/media/cim_TapMeasurements.png
.. |image31| image:: CDPSM_RC1/media/cim_CapacitorMeasurement.png
.. |image32| image:: CDPSM_RC1/media/cim_DCIMLoadModel.png
.. |image33| image:: CDPSM_RC1/media/cim_MeteringUsagePoints.png
.. |image34| image:: CDPSM_RC1/media/cim_MeteringEndDevices.png
.. |image35| image:: CDPSM_RC1/media/cim_CIMTool.png

